.TH TAPCUE 1 "March 2026" "tapcue" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
tapcue \- stream TAP/JSON test output and emit desktop notifications
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tapcue
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.br
.B tapcue init
[\fI--current\fR] [\fI--force\fR]
.br
.B tapcue doctor
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B tapcue
reads test output from standard input.
It supports TAP streams and JSON streams from common test runners, then
emits failure, bailout, and summary notifications.

Format selection defaults to auto-detection. A run summary can also be emitted
as text or JSON for automation.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --quiet-parse-errors
Suppress parse warnings for malformed TAP.
.TP
.B --no-quiet-parse-errors
Force parse warnings on.
.TP
.B --no-notify
Disable desktop notifications.
.TP
.B --notify
Force desktop notifications on.
.TP
.BI --desktop " auto|force-on|force-off"
Desktop notification mode override.
.TP
.BI --format " auto|tap|json|bun"
Input parsing format (default: auto).
.TP
.BI --summary-format " none|text|json"
Emit a final run summary.
.TP
.BI --summary-file " PATH|-"
Write summary output to a file, or use
.B -
for stdout.
.TP
.BI --run-output " split|merged|off"
Runner output passthrough behavior for
.B tapcue run -- ...
.
.TP
.B --auto-runner-adapt
Enable run-mode adaptation for known test runners.
.TP
.B --no-auto-runner-adapt
Disable run-mode adaptation for known test runners.
.TP
.B --dedup-failures
Deduplicate repeated failure notifications.
.TP
.B --no-dedup-failures
Disable failure-notification deduplication.
.TP
.BI --max-failure-notifications " N"
Cap emitted failure notifications per run.
.TP
.B --trace-detection
Print input format auto-detection decisions.
.TP
.B --validate-config
Validate merged config and exit.
.TP
.B --print-effective-config
Print merged config and exit.
.TP
.B doctor
Check desktop notification readiness and explain disabled-notification reasons.
.TP
.B init
Create
.I ./.tapcue.toml
from built-in defaults.
Use
.B --current
to write the current effective config (defaults + user config + local config + env).
Use
.B --force
to overwrite an existing
.I ./.tapcue.toml
.
.TP
.B -h, --help
Show help.
.TP
.B -V, --version
Show version.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B TAPCUE_QUIET_PARSE_ERRORS
Set parser warning suppression (true/false).
.TP
.B TAPCUE_NO_NOTIFY
Disable notifications (true/false).
.TP
.B TAPCUE_NOTIFICATIONS_ENABLED
Enable or disable notifications (true/false).
.TP
.B TAPCUE_DESKTOP
Desktop mode override: auto, force-on, force-off.
.TP
.B TAPCUE_FORMAT
Input format override: auto, tap, json, bun.
.TP
.B TAPCUE_SUMMARY_FORMAT
Summary format: none, text, json.
.TP
.B TAPCUE_SUMMARY_FILE
Summary output destination path.
.TP
.B TAPCUE_RUN_OUTPUT
Runner output passthrough mode: split, merged, off.
.TP
.B TAPCUE_AUTO_RUNNER_ADAPT
Enable or disable run-mode runner adaptation (true/false).
.TP
.B TAPCUE_DEDUP_FAILURES
Enable or disable deduplication (true/false).
.TP
.B TAPCUE_MAX_FAILURE_NOTIFICATIONS
Maximum failure notifications emitted.
.TP
.B TAPCUE_TRACE_DETECTION
Enable format-detection trace output (true/false).
.SH CONFIG FILES
.TP
.I ./.tapcue.toml
Project-local configuration override.
.TP
.I <user-config-dir>/tapcue/config.toml
User-level configuration.

Precedence order:
CLI flags > environment variables > local config > user config > defaults.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Default Bun test output:
.B tapcue run -- bun test
.TP
Go JSON stream:
.B tapcue run -- go test ./...
.TP
Nextest JSON stream:
.B tapcue run -- cargo nextest run
.TP
Jest JSON stream:
.B tapcue run -- jest
.TP
pytest with inferred JUnit output:
.B tapcue run -- pytest
.TP
Emit JSON summary to a file:
.B tapcue --summary-format json --summary-file run-summary.json run -- go test ./...
.TP
CI mode (no desktop notifications + summary file):
.B tapcue --no-notify --summary-format json --summary-file run-summary.json run -- go test ./...
.TP
Validate merged config:
.B tapcue --validate-config
.TP
Generate local config from defaults:
.B tapcue init
.TP
Generate local config from current effective config:
.B tapcue init --current
.TP
Check desktop-notification readiness:
.B tapcue doctor
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Run is successful.
.TP
.B non-zero
Run failed, protocol failure occurred, or a processing/config error happened.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR README.md ,
.BR docs/format-detection.md ,
.BR docs/tap14-compliance.md
